Revise concept & reference docs for Services, Ingress & networking (#30817)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/services-networking/service.md

<!-- overview -->

{{< glossary_definition term_id="service" length="short" >}}
{{< glossary_definition term_id="service" length="short" prepend="In Kubernetes, a Service is" >}}

With Kubernetes you don't need to modify your application to use an unfamiliar service discovery mechanism.
Kubernetes gives Pods their own IP addresses and a single DNS name for a set of Pods,

> and can load-balance across them.

Reviewer: any special reason to hide the IP and DNS details? too low-level?

Author: This conflates aspects of the Pod and Service APIs, which I think can be unhelpful.

Reviewer: I think that this is explained later with more detail, so this SGTM

on the network so that clients can interact with it.

If you use a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="deployment" >}} to run your app,
that Deployment can create and destroy Pods dynamically, as needed - whether that
is to handle failure, or to match against demand (horizontal scaling).

Kubernetes {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="pod" text="Pods" >}} are created and destroyed
to match the desired state of your cluster. Pods are emphemeral resources (you should not
expect that an individual Pod is reliable and durable).

> Each Pod gets its own IP address - Kubernetes networking guarantees that.

Reviewer: hehe, I would not claim Kubernetes guarantees that, it is possible to have duplicated IPs on PodIP since that depend son the CNI plugin cc @thockin

Author: :grimacing: fair enough - I'll reword to explain the _intended_ outcome.

Enter _Services_.

<!-- body -->

## Services in Kubernetes

> In Kubernetes, a Service is an abstraction which defines a logical set of Pods
> and a policy by which to access them (sometimes this pattern is called
> a micro-service).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, a Service employs an abstraction which defines a logical set of Pods and a policy by which to access these pods.
```

Enter _Services_.

<!-- body -->

## Services in Kubernetes

The Service API, part of Kubernetes, is an abstraction to help you expose groups of

> Pods over a network. Each Service object defines a logical set of endpoints (usually

Reviewer: endpoints use to be an overloaded term because of the API and the rest endpoints, should this be "network endpoints"?

Author: Good idea

The Service abstraction enables this decoupling.

The set of Pods targeted by a Service is usually determined
by a {{< glossary_tooltip text="selector" term_id="selector" >}} that you
define.
To learn about other ways to define Service endpoints,
see [Services _without_ selectors](#services-without-selectors).

> If your workload speaks HTTP, you might choose to use an

Author: HTTP/2 (and HTTP 1, and HTTP 3) are forms of HTTP. We don't need to say this.

> If your workload speaks HTTP, you might choose to use an

Reviewer: definitively HTTP only

The Service abstraction enables this decoupling.

The set of Pods targeted by a Service is usually determined
by a {{< glossary_tooltip text="selector" term_id="selector" >}} that you
define.
To learn about other ways to define Service endpoints,
see [Services _without_ selectors](#services-without-selectors).

If your workload speaks HTTP, you might choose to use an
[Ingress](/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/) to control how web traffic
reaches that workload.
Ingress is not a Service type, but it acts as the entry point for your
cluster. An Ingress lets you consolidate your routing rules into a single resource, so
that you can expose multiple components of your workload, running separately in your
cluster, behind a single listener.

### Cloud-native service discovery

If you're able to use Kubernetes APIs for service discovery in your application,
you can query the {{< glossary_tooltip text="API server" term_id="kube-apiserver" >}}
for Endpoints, that get updated whenever the set of Pods in a Service changes.

For non-native applications, Kubernetes offers ways to place a network port or load

> balancer in between your application and the backend Pods

Reviewer: you've removed this trailing dot on purpose?

      targetPort: 9376
```

> That manifest creates a new Service named "my-service", which

Reviewer: do we want to clarify this is a `ClusterIP` type if Service, and that is why it gets an IP assigned?

Author: If this PR isn't introducing a regression, I recommend saving that for a follow-up. I don't want this PR to become “make Service and Ingress docs perfect”.

targets TCP port 9376 on any Pod with the `app=MyApp` label.

Kubernetes assigns this Service an IP address (sometimes called the "cluster IP"),
which is used by the Service proxies
(see [Virtual IPs and service proxies](#virtual-ips-and-service-proxies) below).

The {{<glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller">}} for the Service
continuously scans for Pods that match its selector, and then POSTs any updates to
a set of [EndpointSlices](#endpointslices) that together represent the backend Pods.

The Service controller also manages an older API, [Endpoints](#endpoints), that is
similar to EndpointSlice (but has some limitations around scalability). The Endpoints

> API is widely used and remains a supported Kubernetes API.

Reviewer: for correctness,  there is no services controllers , there are a `endpoints controller` and a `endpointslices controller` , there is also an additional `endpointslice mirroring controller` that mirrors endpoints to endpointslices for compatibility, but I think that this last bit is more an implementation detail that users may not need

Author: I might change “Service controller” to “control plane”.

Reviewer: yeah, if you want to be more specific you can say is the `controller-manager` component, that is the one that hosts those controllers

      targetPort: 9376
```

That manifest creates a new Service named "my-service", which
targets TCP port 9376 on any Pod with the `app.kubernetes.io/name: MyApp` label.

Kubernetes assigns this Service an IP address (sometimes called the "cluster IP"),
which is used by the Service proxies
(see [Virtual IPs and service proxies](#virtual-ips-and-service-proxies) below).

The {{<glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller">}} for the Service
continuously scans for Pods that match its selector, and then POSTs any updates to
a set of [EndpointSlices](#endpointslices) that together represent the backend Pods.

The Service controller also manages an older API, [Endpoints](#endpoints), that is
similar to EndpointSlice (but has some limitations around scalability). The Endpoints

> API is widely used and remains a supported Kubernetes API.

Reviewer: there is no service controller, is the endpoints or endpointslice controller that does the mapping based on the selector

    targetPort: http-web-svc
```

This works even if there is a mixture of Pods in the Service using a single
configured name, with the same network protocol available via different
port numbers. This offers a lot of flexibility for deploying and evolving
your Services. For example, you can change the port numbers that Pods expose
in the next version of your backend software, without breaking clients.

The default protocol for Services is
[TCP](/docs/reference/networking/service-protocols/#protocol-tcp); you can also
use any other [supported protocol](/docs/reference/networking/service-protocols/).

Because many Services need to expose more than one port, Kubernetes supports
[multiple port definitions](#multi-port-services) for a single Service.
Each port definition can have the same `protocol`, or a different one.

### Services without selectors

Services most commonly abstract access to Kubernetes Pods thanks to the selector,
but when used with a corresponding set of
{{<glossary_tooltip term_id="endpoint-slice" text="EndpointSlices">}}
(or with a single Endpoints)
object and without a selector, the Service can abstract other kinds of backends,

> including ones that run outside the cluster.

Reviewer: do you want to warn about the possible security problem of this?

Author: If this isn't a regression, I'd prefer to save a tweak there to happen separately from the refactor (this is already a big PR).
However, if the existing docs cover this then I'd definitely want to fix that.

Reviewer: nope, just a comment I noticed meanwhile I was reading, keeping it seems good to me

```

Because this Service has no selector, the corresponding EndpointSlice (and
legacy Endpoints) objects are not created automatically. You can manually map the Service
to the network address and port where it's running, by adding an EndpointSlice
object manually. For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: discovery.k8s.io/v1
kind: EndpointSlice
metadata:
  name: my-service-1 # by convention, use the name of the Service
                     # as a prefix for the name of the EndpointSlice
  labels:
    # You should set the "kubernetes.io/service-name" label.
    # Set its value to match the name of the Service
    kubernetes.io/service-name: my-service
addressType: IPv4
ports:
  - name: '' # empty because port 9376 is not assigned as a well-known
             # port (by IANA)
    appProtocol: http
    protocol: TCP
    port: 9376
endpoints:
  - addresses:
      - "10.4.5.6" # the IP addresses in this list can appear in any order
      - "10.1.2.3"
```

When you create an [EndpointSlice](#endpointslices) object for a Service, you can
use any name for the EndpointSlice. Each EndpointSlice in a namespace must have a
unique name. You link an EndpointSlice to a Service by setting the

> `kubernetes.io/service-name` {{< glossary_tooltip text="label" term_id="label" >}}

Author: Is this description of matching correct?

on that EndpointSlice.

{{< note >}}
The endpoint IPs _must not_ be: loopback (127.0.0.0/8 for IPv4, ::1/128 for IPv6), or
link-local (169.254.0.0/16 and 224.0.0.0/24 for IPv4, fe80::/64 for IPv6).

The endpoint IP addresses cannot be the cluster IPs of other Kubernetes Services,
because {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="kube-proxy" >}} doesn't support virtual IPs
as a destination.
{{< /note >}}

Accessing a Service without a selector works the same as if it had a selector.
In the example above, traffic is routed to one of the two endpoints defined in

> the EndpointSlice manifest: a TCP connection to 10.1.2.3 or 10.4.5.6, on port 9376.

Author: Any mistakes here?

from being used as a proxy to endpoints the caller may not be authorized to access.
{{< /note >}}

An `ExternalName` Service is a special case of Service that does not have
selectors and uses DNS names instead. For more information, see the
[ExternalName](#externalname) section later in this document.

### Over-capacity endpoints

If an Endpoints resource has more than 1000 endpoints then a Kubernetes v1.22 (or later)
cluster annotates that Endpoints with `endpoints.kubernetes.io/over-capacity: truncated`.
This annotation indicates that the affected Endpoints object is over capacity and that
the endpoints controller has truncated the number of endpoints to 1000.

### Endpoints

In the Kubernetes API, an
[Endpoints](/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/service-resources/endpoints-v1/)
(the resource kind is plural) defines a list of network endpoints, typically
referenced by a Service to define which Pods the traffic can be sent to.

### EndpointSlices

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.21" state="stable" >}}

(If you're just beginning to learn about Services, it's OK to skip learning
about the differences between Endpoints and EndpointSlice; the overall effect

> is similar and the control plane synchronizes changes between the two APIs

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should add this paragraph here and just say that EndpointSlices is an evolution of Endpoints , to handle better scalability and other network features. Another note is that Endpoints API is in fact frozen and any new features are only developed in the EndpointSlices feature

cc: @robscott

Author: I wasn't sure which API to focus on. I can see the case for either.

Reviewer 3: I would focus on EndpointSlices since all new features will rely on them. EndpointSlice functionality is a superset of Endpoints functionality.

(If you're just beginning to learn about Services, it's OK to skip learning
about the differences between Endpoints and EndpointSlice; the overall effect
is similar and the control plane synchronizes changes between the two APIs
where possible).

EndpointSlices are an API resource that can provide a more scalable alternative
to Endpoints. Although conceptually quite similar to Endpoints, EndpointSlices
allow for distributing network endpoints across multiple resources. By default,
an EndpointSlice is considered "full" once it reaches 100 endpoints, at which
to Endpoints. Although conceptually quite similar to Endpoints, the
[EndpointSlice API](/docs/reference/kubernetes-api/service-resources/endpoint-slice-v1/)
allows for distributing the set of network endpoints across multiple resources.
By default, an EndpointSlice is considered "full" once it reaches 100 endpoints, at which
point additional EndpointSlices will be created to store any additional
endpoints.

EndpointSlices provide additional attributes and functionality which is
described in detail in [EndpointSlices](/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/).

> ### Application protocol

Reviewer: @sftim it is hard to me to review since this point, is just a copy and paste to other places or there was some rewording that needs review too?

Author: I'd compare the preview to the existing docs, but please also look at commit 2 and onwards as these do have some wording changes.

        service.beta.kubernetes.io/cce-load-balancer-internal-vpc: "true"
[...]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="GCP" %}}

```yaml
[...]
metadata:
    name: my-service
    annotations:
        cloud.google.com/load-balancer-type: "Internal"
[...]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="IBM Cloud" %}}

```yaml
[...]
metadata:
    name: my-service
    annotations:
        service.kubernetes.io/ibm-load-balancer-cloud-provider-ip-type: "private"
[...]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="OCI" %}}

```yaml
[...]
metadata:
    name: my-service
    annotations:
        service.beta.kubernetes.io/oci-load-balancer-internal: true
[...]
```
 {{% /tab %}}

{{% tab name="OpenStack" %}}

```yaml
[...]
metadata:
    name: my-service
    annotations:
        service.beta.kubernetes.io/openstack-internal-load-balancer: "true"
[...]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Tencent Cloud" %}}

```yaml
[...]
metadata:
  annotations:
    service.kubernetes.io/qcloud-loadbalancer-internal-subnetid: subnet-xxxxx
[...]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### `type: ExternalName` {#externalname}

{{< note >}}
You need either `kube-dns` version 1.7 or CoreDNS version 0.0.8 or higher
to use the `ExternalName` type.

> {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: I think we can omit this nowadays, externalname is part of the DNS specification https://github.com/kubernetes/dns/blob/master/docs/specification.md#25---records-for-external-name-services , any Kubernetes DNS implementation has to support them to be conformant

Author: If you definitely want to see that change made @aojea, would you be willing to make a PR against _main_ to omit that text?

See https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#publishing-services-service-types for the current version.

this case, you can create what are termed _headless Services_, by explicitly
specifying `"None"` for the cluster IP address (`.spec.clusterIP`).

You can use a headless Service to interface with other service discovery mechanisms,
without being tied to Kubernetes' implementation.

For headless Services, a cluster IP is not allocated, kube-proxy does not handle
these Services, and there is no load balancing or proxying done by the platform
for them. How DNS is automatically configured depends on whether the Service has
selectors defined:

### With selectors

For headless Services that define selectors, the Kubernetes control plane creates
EndpointSlice objects in the Kubernetes API, and modifies the DNS configuration to return
A records (IP addresses) that point directly to the Pods backing the Service.

### Without selectors

For headless Services that do not define selectors, the control plane does
not create EndpointSlice objects. However, the DNS system looks for and configures
either:

* DNS CNAME records for [`type: ExternalName`](#externalname) Services.
* DNS A records for any Endpoints that share a name with the Service, for all

>   types other than `ExternalName`.

Reviewer: @chrisohaver do you mind review this DNS part?

Reviewer 4: OK.  I've commented with a suggested a change.

> * DNS A records for any Endpoints that share a name with the Service, for all
>   types other than `ExternalName`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* DNS A/AAAA records for all IPs of ready Endpoints with the same name/namespace as the Service.
```

Author: Does Kubernetes/ CoreDNS / whatever _actually_ pay attention to EndpointSlices, instead, these days?

Reviewer 4: CoreDNS does for k8s 1.19+ clusters. But EndpointSlices contain a list of Endpoints... So I think using the word Endpoints is OK here.  IMO there is the concept of a Service "Endpoint", and then there are the API representations of them "Endpoints API Object" and "EndpointSlices API Object", both of which hold more than one Endpoint.

If we want to hone the wording, then perhaps:
`* DNS A/AAAA records for all IP addresses of the Service's ready Endpoints.`

Author: > EndpointSlices contain a list of Endpoints

Although they do, the `Endpoints` in an EndpointSlice are not v1 `Endpoints` from the core API group (the `Endpoints` in an EndpointSlice don't have a `metadata` and `subsets` fields like an Endpoints resource does).

We should use the EndpointSlice kind here; that's what the commit
> 
> ```
> Favor EndpointSlice over Endpoints
>
> Document EndpointSlice as the preferred and most appropriate mechanism
> to record the backing endpoints of a Service.
> ```

is all about.

Author: I'll revise that doc to talk about EndpointSlices.

## Discovering services

For clients running inside your cluster, Kubernetes supports two primary modes of
finding a Service: environment variables and DNS.

> ### Environment variables

Reviewer: @thockin was not this approach discouraged?

variables:

```shell
REDIS_PRIMARY_SERVICE_HOST=10.0.0.11
REDIS_PRIMARY_SERVICE_PORT=6379
REDIS_PRIMARY_PORT=tcp://10.0.0.11:6379
REDIS_PRIMARY_PORT_6379_TCP=tcp://10.0.0.11:6379
REDIS_PRIMARY_PORT_6379_TCP_PROTO=tcp
REDIS_PRIMARY_PORT_6379_TCP_PORT=6379
REDIS_PRIMARY_PORT_6379_TCP_ADDR=10.0.0.11
```

{{< note >}}
When you have a Pod that needs to access a Service, and you are using
the environment variable method to publish the port and cluster IP to the client
Pods, you must create the Service *before* the client Pods come into existence.
Otherwise, those client Pods won't have their environment variables populated.

If you only use DNS to discover the cluster IP for a Service, you don't need to
worry about this ordering issue.
{{< /note >}}

Kubernetes also supports and provides variables that are compatible with Docker
Engine's "_[legacy container links](https://docs.docker.com/network/links/)_" feature.
You can read [`makeLinkVariables`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/dd2d12f6dc0e654c15d5db57a5f9f6ba61192726/pkg/kubelet/envvars/envvars.go#L72)
to see how this is implemented in Kubernetes.

> ### DNS

Reviewer: some reference that any DNS implementation  must follow the DNS specification https://github.com/kubernetes/dns/blob/master/docs/specification.md?

Author: I reckon that'd be good to add in a _follow up_ PR (this one is already too big).

Kubernetes also supports DNS SRV (Service) records for named ports.  If the
`my-service.my-ns` Service has a port named `http` with the protocol set to
`TCP`, you can do a DNS SRV query for `_http._tcp.my-service.my-ns` to discover
the port number for `http`, as well as the IP address.

The Kubernetes DNS server is the only way to access `ExternalName` Services.
You can find more information about `ExternalName` resolution in
[DNS Pods and Services](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/).

## Traffic policies

You can set the `.spec.internalTrafficPolicy` and `.spec.externalTrafficPolicy` fields
to control how Kubernetes routes traffic to healthy (“ready”) backends.

See [Traffic Policies](/docs/reference/networking/virtual-ips/#traffic-policies) for more details.

## Custom IP address configuration for `type: NodePort` Services {#service-nodeport-custom-listen-address}

You can set up nodes in your cluster to use a particular IP address for serving
node port services. You might want to do this if each node is connected to multiple networks
(for example: one network for application traffic, and another network for traffic between

> nodes and the control plane).

Reviewer: yeah, we should also encourage to use it, otherwise any port on any IP on that node can be used to reach the service, that have some interesting scenarios with some cloud providers https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/111863

/cc @thockin @danwinship
